Repository containing reproducible code for the paper: Cultural Consumption and Externalities: Evidence from a Danish Ticket Scheme

Abstract: Governments in most of the developed world fund arts and culture either directly or indi- rectly. Theoretially, the arguments are based on the arts and culture being public goods or providing positive externalities. The size of the externalities for a variety of cultural goods has been empirically investigated in numerous stated preference studies. However, the existence of externalities has not previously been tested as a causal relation. While the public benefits are mostly related to the supply of a cultural good, there are also expected to be externalities are related to the consumption. We call them cultural-capital externalities, and the expectation is that private consumption jointly produces a private and a public good. The important point is that these consumer externalities are transmit- ted through the individuals (users) consumption by means of social activities and interactions among human beings. Without the consumption by the users, no public good benefit or externalities are pro- duced. In this paper we exploit variation generated by a national ticket purchasing scheme to estimate the causal effects of theater consumption on public returns. As an indicator we use individuals’ WTP for theatres measured in a contingent valuation study. Exploiting differences in municipalities’ age distribution as an instrument for the total number of theater visits, we find that there are significant cultural-capital externalities for users, but we find no effects for non-users. An important limitation of our study is that citizens’ WTP is used as an indicator for the size of cultural-capital externalities. However, our study shows that it is possible to test the existence of externalities of cultural consump- tion in an empirically convincing causal set-up. In future research, there is a need for finding better outcome measures than WTP.
